feat(exporter-logs-otlp-grpc): implements otlp-grpc exporters for logs (#3712)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js: experimental/packages/exporter-logs-otlp-grpc/README.md

# OpenTelemetry Collector Logs Exporter for node with grpc

[![NPM Published Version][npm-img]][npm-url]
[![Apache License][license-image]][license-image]

**Note: This is an experimental package under active development. New releases may include breaking changes.**

This module provides exporter for node to be used with OTLP (`grpc`) compatible receivers.

> Compatible with [opentelemetry-collector][opentelemetry-collector-url] versions `>=0.16 <=0.53`.

Reviewer: Should we instead use a proto version and say we support all collectors which accept OTLP version [v0.18.0+](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/releases/tag/v0.18.0)

> Compatible with [opentelemetry-collector][opentelemetry-collector-url] versions `>=0.16 <=0.53`.

Reviewer: That would be collector v0.54 and later https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector/releases/tag/v0.54.0

# OpenTelemetry Collector Logs Exporter for node with grpc

[![NPM Published Version][npm-img]][npm-url]
[![Apache License][license-image]][license-image]

**Note: This is an experimental package under active development. New releases may include breaking changes.**

This module provides exporter for node to be used with OTLP (`grpc`) compatible receivers.

> Compatible with [opentelemetry-collector][opentelemetry-collector-url] versions `>=0.54.0`.

Author: Can you please suggest a change? I am not really familiar with the collector. Thx.

> This module provides exporter for node to be used with OTLP (`grpc`) compatible receivers.
> Compatible with [opentelemetry-collector][opentelemetry-collector-url] versions `>=0.54.0`.

Reviewer: Maybe something like this? Obviously substituting the tested version with whatever version you're actually using.

```suggestion
This module provides exporter for node to be used with OTLP (`grpc`) compatible receivers using protocol version 0.12 or greater.
Last tested with [opentelemetry-collector][opentelemetry-collector-url] version `v0.75.0`.
```

> Compatible with [opentelemetry-collector][opentelemetry-collector-url] versions `>=0.54.0`.

Reviewer: Probably 18. I was looking through the proto diffs and there are some changes that might affect compatibility. Not entirely sure as I'm not a proto expert but we should probably just make the guarantee we're sure about and leave the rest to the user to decide. We're emitting version 0.18 proto.

> This module provides exporter for node to be used with OTLP (`grpc`) compatible receivers.
> Compatible with [opentelemetry-collector][opentelemetry-collector-url] versions `>=0.54.0`.

Reviewer: This simpler statement may even cover it.

```suggestion
This module provides an exporter for OTLP gRPC logs using protocol version `v0.18`.
```

> Compatible with [opentelemetry-collector][opentelemetry-collector-url] versions `>=0.54.0`.

Reviewer 2: I like the simple statement that we're emitting `v0.18`. It's to the point and it does not over-promise. :slightly_smiling_face:

**Note: This is an experimental package under active development. New releases may include breaking changes.**

This module provides exporter for node to be used with OTLP (`grpc`) compatible receivers.
Compatible with [opentelemetry-collector][opentelemetry-collector-url] versions `>=0.75.0`.

## Installation

```bash
npm install --save @opentelemetry/exporter-logs-otlp-grpc
```

## Service Name

The OpenTelemetry Collector Exporter does not have a service name configuration.
In order to set the service name, use the `service.name` resource attribute as prescribed in the [OpenTelemetry Resource Semantic Conventions][semconv-resource-service-name].
To see documentation and sample code for the traces exporter, as well as instructions for using TLS, visit the [Collector Trace Exporter for web and node][trace-exporter-url].
To see documentation and sample code for the metric exporter, see the [exporter-metrics-otlp-grpc package][metrics-exporter-url]

## Logs in Node - GRPC

The OTLPLogsExporter in Node expects the URL to only be the hostname. It will not work with `/v1/logs`. All
options that work with trace also work with logs.

```js
import {
  LoggerProvider,

>   SimpleLogRecordProcessor,

Reviewer 2: We may want to recommend the BatchLogRecordProcessor here, as people may be inclined to copy the code from this readme and the SimpleLogRecordProcessor may introduce some overhead.

Author: FYI, `SimpleSpanProcessor` is used many example packages and README files.

Reviewer: `SimpleSpanProcessor` is useful for getting started because you don't have delays in demos and that kind of thing. I think we need to be more consistent as a project in what we recommend for local testing vs production. Either is fine here since we should apply our decision to all packages later anyway.

} from '@opentelemetry/sdk-logs';
import { OTLPLogsExporter } from '@opentelemetry/exporter-logs-otlp-grpc';

const collectorOptions = {
  // url is optional and can be omitted - default is http://localhost:4317
  url: 'http://<collector-hostname>:<port>',
};

const loggerExpoter = new OTLPLogsExporter(collectorOptions);
const loggerProvider = new LoggerProvider();

loggerProvider.addLogRecordProcessor(
  new SimpleLogRecordProcessor(loggerExpoter)
);

['SIGINT', 'SIGTERM'].forEach(signal => {
  process.on(signal, () => loggerProvider.shutdown().catch(console.error));
});

// logging
const logger = loggerProvider.getLogger('example-logger');
logger.emit({ body: 'example-log' });
```

## Environment Variable Configuration

| Environment variable | Description |
|----------------------|-------------|
| OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_LOGS_ENDPOINT | The endpoint to send logs to. By default `localhost:4317` will be used. |
| OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT | The endpoint to send trace, metric, and logs to. By default `localhost:4317` will be used. |

> | OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_LOGS_COMPRESSION | The compression type to use on OTLP logs requests. Options include gzip. By default no compression will be used. |

Reviewer 2: I cannot see this used anywhere. Is this env var used in this implementation? :thinking: 

Same for `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_LOGS_INSECURE`,
`OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_LOGS_CERTIFICATE`,
`OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_LOGS_CLIENT_KEY`,
`OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_LOGS_CLIENT_CERTIFICATE`,
`OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_LOGS_TIMEOUT` :thinking:

Author: I see, there is `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_TRACES_COMPRESSION` used in the base packages and need to be fixed (both for metrics and logs). Can I just remove these env vars for now and fix it in another PR?

Author: After some deeper investigation, I found that many code need to be fixed and it would be a big change. I prefer keep these env here for now and fix the problems later.

- OTLP-related metrics exporters don't use their env vars too.
- `otlp-exporter-base` and `otlp-grpc-exporter-base` use trace-related env vars in their code.

Related code lines found by now:
[exporter-metrics-otlp-grpc/README.md](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/blob/de354dbbdd24bb9f93edef6d098fe8484c7bc3ff/experimental/packages/opentelemetry-exporter-metrics-otlp-grpc/README.md?plain=1#L62)
[exporter-metrics-otlp-http/README.md](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/blob/de354dbbdd24bb9f93edef6d098fe8484c7bc3ff/experimental/packages/opentelemetry-exporter-metrics-otlp-http/README.md?plain=1#L82)
[exporter-metrics-otlp-proto/README.md](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/blob/de354dbbdd24bb9f93edef6d098fe8484c7bc3ff/experimental/packages/opentelemetry-exporter-metrics-otlp-proto/README.md?plain=1#L52)
[otlp-exporter-base/src/util.ts](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/blob/de354dbbdd24bb9f93edef6d098fe8484c7bc3ff/experimental/packages/otlp-exporter-base/src/util.ts#L96)
[otlp-exporter-base/src/platform/node/util.ts](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/blob/de354dbbdd24bb9f93edef6d098fe8484c7bc3ff/experimental/packages/otlp-exporter-base/src/platform/node/util.ts#L222)
[otlp-grpc-exporter-base/src/util.ts](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-js/blob/de354dbbdd24bb9f93edef6d098fe8484c7bc3ff/experimental/packages/otlp-grpc-exporter-base/src/util.ts#L173)

Reviewer 2: I think adding support for it in a follow-up should be fine so that we can keep the diff manageable. :slightly_smiling_face: 
We should, however, remove the unsupported ones from `README.md` for now.

Reviewer 2: I created a follow-up for adding the env vars #3747
